Jamie Foster
jfoster@ufl.edu
321-525-1047
University of Florida, Department of Microbiology and cell Science

Title: Generating metabolic networks of the modern stromatolite microbiome

Abstract: 
Stromatolites are quintessential geomicrobiological ecosystems with a fossil record that extends back 3.5 billion years. These long-lived features are 
sedimentary structures formed as a result of the synergy between microbial metabolisms and the environment, and are used in a wide range of 
biotechnological applications (e.g. biogenic life support, carbon sequestration, and natural product discovery). Ancient stromatolites formed massive 
carbonate reefs comparable in size to modern coral reefs, dominating life on our planet for 80% of Earth history. Modern stromatolites, in contrast, are 
relatively rare, but have been found in diverse habitats including freshwater, marine and hypersaline environments. Although considerable progress has 
been made in identifying key metabolisms associated with modern stromatolites, there is a gap in knowledge regarding the nature of the stromatolite 
microbiome (i.e., totality of microbes, genomes and environmental interactions) and the degree to which the core microbiome is conserved in space and 
time. In this project metagenomes collected from over 37 stromatolites will be integrated and bioinformatically compared to assess whether some microbes 
and metabolisms are shared between morphologically and geographically distinct stromatolites. A student will be expected to help write scripts that will 
help integrate the metagenomic data and help determine the dominant metabolisms shared between ecosystems. A student with a strong background 
computational sciences and programing languages (e.g. R, python, perl) that wants more experience in biological in the following programs is encouraged 
to apply. 

Student Expectations: The student will be expected to work with a graduate student and help analyzed metagenomic data by writing scripts that will 
integrate the sequencing data to assess the dominant pathways and microbes within the stromatolites.

Work Expectations: The student will be expected to work 8 h days Monday thru Friday for a total of 40 h per week.
